---
title: "Syllabus - Human mind and human behavior"
excerpt: "This is the syllabus for the course 'Human mind and human behavior'."
tags: syllabus psychology human mind behavior
header:
  teaser: https://thumbnail8.coupangcdn.com/thumbnails/remote/492x492ex/image/retail-product-api/A00077021/100209435/111776127/main/9791162263631_L.jpg
---

## 1. Course Outline
The purpose of this course is to introduce the essence of scientific psychology and understand how basic human behavior and the workings of the mind occur. In particular, students will learn about the results of scientific research on various aspects of human behavior, from psychological research methodology and the communication process of nerve cells to higher cognitive processes such as consciousness, learning, memory, and thinking, thereby deepening their understanding of human behavior and developing critical thinking skills. Furthermore, they will naturally encounter cases of convergence research, which is one of the important characteristics of psychology, and develop their ability to think comprehensively.

---

## 2. Textbook
- **마이어스의 심리학(13th Edition)**, co-authored by Myers, G. C. & DeWall N. C., co-translated by 신현정, 김비아, Sigma Press

---

## 3. Grading
- **Attendance, Tardiness, and Class Attitude (10%)**: F will be given for 1/3 absences
- **Quiz (20%)**: There will be 3-4 quizzes scheduled. They will be announced in advance the week before the quiz.
- **Midterm Exam (35%)**: The midterm exam will be a written exam, and can be multiple choice, descriptive, etc.
- **Final Exam (35%)**: The final exam will be a written exam, and can be multiple choice, descriptive, etc.

---

## 4. Weekly Plan

| Week | Content |
|------|------|
| Week 1 | Introduction to Psychology |
| Week 2 | Psychology Research Methods I |
| Week 3 | Psychology Research Methods II |
| Week 4 | Biology of the Mind I |
| Week 5 | Biology of the Mind II |
| Week 6 | Consciousness and the Dual-Track Mind I |
| Week 7 | Consciousness and the Dual-Track Mind II |
| Week 8 | Midterm Exam |
| Week 9 | Sensation and Perception I |
| Week 10 | Sensation and Perception II |
| Week 11 | Learning I |
| Week 12 | Learning II |
| Week 13 | Memory I |
| Week 14 | Memory II |
| Week 15 | Thought and Language |
| Week 16 | Final Exam |

※ Please note in advance that the above plan may change depending on the situation.